WHAT IS THE PROBLEM AND WHY IT MATTERS


The recent appearance of highly virulent strains of influenza, such as 2003 H5N1 avian and 2009 H1N1 pandemic, underscore our need to discover the mechanisms that determine the pathogenicity of the numerous strains of influenza.  Unfortunately, the virulence of any given virus is determined not just by the virus' own attributes, but by a complex web of interactions between the virus and its host's immune response.  In attempting to understand what makes certain viruses more virulent in humans than others, we must strive to understand the individual interactions between the virus and the various components of the human immune system.

In this paper we examine the immune response to infections in human bronchial tissue of three different strains of influenza: avian aH5N1, seasonal sH1N1, and pandemic pH1N1.  The human immune respones to a viral infection can be separated into two phases, the innate response and the secondary response.  Here, we focus on the secondary response.  Specifically, we look at the mechanisms the body uses to help guide activated antigen-specific CD8+ T cells from the lymph node to the focus of infection (FOI) in the human lung.  Previous work has shown that efficient recruitment of T cells to the FOI is crucial for the eventual clearance of the virus \ref{x, y, z}.  Here we extend this work to examine how the unique properties of the three strains of influenza affect this process.

Because obtaining data from \textit{in vivo} systems is both difficult and expensive, we use computational modeling to allow real-time observations of the immune system's response to the infecitons.  To do so, we present the most comprehensive agent-based model (ABM) to date of the secondary immune response to an influenza infection in the lung.  To help calibrate our model, we collected \textit{in vitro} data of the stimulated response of several chemokines to each of the three strains of influenza.  We further set our model parameters by using values from literature when available and estimating using a combintion of biologically plausible ranges and computational methods when not.  We then use our spatial ABM to examine the interplay between the three influenza infections and the subsequent T cell response.  Finally, we perform a sensitivity analysis on the model parameters to both validate their values and to examine their individual effects on the infection result.

Our model allows us to examine how the combination of viral and immune system characteristics affect the strength of the given infeciton.  The results give us specific insights into how these features determine the pathogenicity of the different viruses.  First, the model predicts the control and clearance of the aH5N1 and sH1N1 strains and predicts a runaway infection for the pH1N1 strain.  These results are consistent with the previously reported replication rates of the three strains of influenza.  

Further examination, coupled with the spatial nature of our model, reveals previously unknown challenges to the T cells' ability to clear the rapidly replicating pH1N1 infection.  Infected cells secrete chemokine molecules which then diffuse across the infected region.  This process creates isolated regions, or local maxima, of high chemokine concentrations.  Because T cells use the chemokine gradient to locate the focus on infection, they often become stuck together in these high concentrated areas.  While the local maxima do move and flatten, their speed is limited by their diffusion and decay rates.  Our results suggest that the host cells' chemokine response may not only be ineffective, it may actually hinder T cells' ability to find and clear infected cells when presented with a strain of influenza with a rapid replication rate.  

Finally, our sensitivity analysis examines the individual effects of each parameter in our model.  We use the results of this analysis to classify the parameters as critical or not.  We find that most parameter values are relatively stable across a broad range.  Furthermore, the parameter classification matches the parameter type.  Chemokine related parameters are mostly stable within a reasonable range.  On the other hand, parameters related to the viral kinetics have a strong effect on the model results.  This leads us to conclude that the dynamics of the infection are dominated by the properties of the virus, confirming that the high replication rate of 2009 pH1N1 influenza is largely responsible for its runaway infection. 





OUR SOLUTION

	Contributions...	

WHY IT MATTERS


% --------------------------------------------

Contributions:

Experimental Data
Chemokine Rates
Parameter List
ABM Results
T Cell Clumping Observation
Sensitivity Analysis
Mitigation Implications

1. We develop the most comprehensive model to date of influenza infection in the lung, combining results from biological measurements, ODE modeling, and Agent Based Simulation
2. The model is more precise than simple ODE or DDE models because it can account for spatial effects not studied before.
3. Our model confirms results that indicate infections of aH5N1 are quickly cleared, sH1N1 is cleared (though more slowly) and pH1N1 is unable to be cleared
4. We perform sensitivity analysis on our model and find that virus dynamics dominate the course of an infection.
